update: ksp-multi-round.md (#5596)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/ksp/ksp-multi-round.md

> [//]: # (title: Multiple round processing)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[//]: # (title: Multiple-round processing)
```

Reviewer: For consistent spelling

> KSP supports multiple round processing, or processing files over multiple rounds. The output from each processing round 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
KSP supports multiple-round processing, or processing files over multiple rounds. The output from each processing round 
```

is used as additional input in each subsequent round.

To use multiple-round processing, return deferred symbols from `SymbolProcessor.process()` as a `List<KSAnnotated>`. KSP 
processes these symbols in the next round.

> To defer invalid symbols, filter them with `KSAnnotated.validate()`, as shown in the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To defer invalid symbols, filter them with `KSAnnotated.validate()`, for example:
```

}
```

Multiple-round processing ends when an entire round generates no new files. If deferred symbols remain unprocessed, KSP
logs an error for each processor with remaining deferred symbols.

## Deferring symbols to the next round

Processors can defer symbols to a later round when additional information is required from other processors. A processor 
can continue deferring a symbol across multiple rounds until the required information becomes available. Once the 
information is available, the processor can process the symbol.

> Processors should only defer invalid symbols when necessary information is lacking.
> Processors should not defer symbols from classpath. KSP will also filter out any deferred
> symbols that are not from source code.
>
{style=”note”}

For example, a processor that generates a builder for an annotated class might require all constructor parameter types 
to resolve to concrete types. In the first round, one of the parameter types might not be resolvable. In a later round, 

> it can become resolvable because of files generated in an earlier round. The processor can then process the class.

Reviewer 2: nit: I think "... it can become resolvable because of files generated in the meantime" might be clearer than "an earlier round".

> Validation often requires type resolution, which can be expensive. Check only the information required to process the symbol.
>
{style=”tip”}

Continuing the previous example, the builder processor might validate only the constructor parameter types of annotated 
classes. Specifically, it can check that each resolved parameter type has `isError == false`.

KSP validates all symbols that are directly reachable within the validated symbol's enclosing scope. By default, 
validation checks whether references in that scope resolve to concrete types. Validation does not recursively validate 
the referenced types.

> Default validation behavior might not be suitable for all use cases. To customize validation, use `KSValidateVisitor` 
> and provide a `predicate` lambda that selects the symbols to validate. `KSValidateVisitor` uses the `predicate` to 
> determine which symbols to check.
>
{style=”tip”}

## Files accessible at each round

Both newly generated files and existing files are accessible through a `Resolver`.

KSP provides two APIs for accessing files:

* `Resolver.getAllFiles()` returns a list of both previously existing and newly generated files.

> * `Resolver.getNewFiles()` returns only newly generated files.

Reviewer 2: Nit: AFAIK, `getNewFiles` only returns files that were generated last round. Maybe this could be changed to reflect that.

## `getSymbolsAnnotatedWith()`

Use `getSymbolsAnnotatedWith()` as the primary entry point for obtaining relevant symbols.

In each round, `getSymbolsAnnotatedWith()` returns only symbols from newly generated files and symbols deferred from 

> the previous round. This helps avoid unnecessary reprocessing.

Reviewer 2: This should be `Resolver.getSymbolsWithAnnotation`. There is no `getSymbolsWithAnnotation` :)

## Processor instantiation

KSP creates a processor instance only once. You can store information in the processor instance and reuse it across 
multiple rounds.

However, not all KSP symbols can be reused across rounds. Symbol resolution results can change when processors generate 

> new files, which can affect the validity of previously resolved symbols.

Reviewer 2: nit: Maybe we should also add a tip here or extra bit of information that they should never store the resolver across rounds.

}
```

Multiple-round processing ends when an entire round generates no new files. If deferred symbols remain unprocessed, KSP
logs an error for each processor with remaining deferred symbols.

## Deferring symbols to the next round

Processors can defer symbols to a later round when additional information is required from other processors. A processor 
can continue deferring a symbol across multiple rounds until the required information becomes available. Once the 
information is available, the processor can process the symbol.

> Processors should only defer invalid symbols when necessary information is lacking.

> > Processors should not defer symbols from classpath. KSP will also filter out any deferred

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Processors should not defer symbols from the classpath. KSP will also filter out any deferred
```

Reviewer: I think this note should be a regular text describing existing limitations/rules (in a list to avoid repetition), for example:

> Processors should only defer symbols when:
> 
> * Necessary information is lacking to process them immediately.
> * The symbols originate from source code, as symbols from the classpath should never be deferred (and will be filtered out by KSP).

> symbols that are not from source code.
>

> {style=”note”}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{style="note"}
```

Reviewer: and in other notes/tips

>
{style=”tip”}

Continuing the previous example, the builder processor might validate only the constructor parameter types of annotated 
classes. Specifically, it can check that each resolved parameter type has `isError == false`.

KSP validates all symbols that are directly reachable within the validated symbol's enclosing scope. By default, 
validation checks whether references in that scope resolve to concrete types. Validation does not recursively validate 
the referenced types.

> Default validation behavior might not be suitable for all use cases. To customize validation, use `KSValidateVisitor` 
> and provide a `predicate` lambda that selects the symbols to validate. `KSValidateVisitor` uses the `predicate` to 
> determine which symbols to check.
>
{style=”tip”}

## Files accessible at each round

Both newly generated files and existing files are accessible through a `Resolver`.

KSP provides two APIs for accessing files:

* `Resolver.getAllFiles()` returns a list of both previously existing and newly generated files.

* `Resolver.getNewFiles()` returns only the files that were generated in the previous round.

> ## `getSymbolsWithAnnotation()`

Reviewer: It's a bit weird to see just a function name on the 2nd level, maybe change to some call-to-action like "Retrieve relevant symbols". Plus I think this section could be a part of the previous one since it's also about Resolver APIs

> Use `Resolver.getSymbolsAnnotatedWith()` as the primary entry point for obtaining relevant symbols.

Reviewer 3: Isnt this `Resolver.getSymbolsWithAnnotation()` . @jaschdoc is there another API called `getSymbolsAnnotatedWith` ?

Author: Yes, you are right. The old documents have both, and we changed them in most places, but somehow not here. Thank you!

In each round, `Resolver.getSymbolsWithAnnotation()` returns only symbols from newly generated files and symbols deferred from 
the previous round. This helps avoid unnecessary reprocessing.

## Processor instantiation

KSP creates a processor instance only once. You can store information in the processor instance and reuse it across 
multiple rounds.

However, not all KSP symbols can be reused across rounds. Symbol resolution results can change when processors generate 
new files, which can affect the validity of previously resolved symbols.

> > Use only the Resolver instance passed to the processor in the current round. Do not store a Resolver and reuse it 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Use only the `Resolver` instance passed to the processor in the current round. Do not store a `Resolver` and reuse it 
```

> > across rounds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> across rounds.
>
```

{style="note"}

## Error and exception handling

> 1. **Errors**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Errors
```

    A processor reports an error by calling `KSPLogger.error()`.

    When a processor reports an error, KSP calls `SymbolProcessor.onError()` instead of `SymbolProcessor.finish()`. 
    Processing stops after the current round completes.

    Other processors continue processing normally during that round. KSP handles errors only after all processors finish 
    the current round.

> 2. **Exceptions**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Exceptions
```

>    KSP distinguishes between exceptions thrown by KSP and exceptions thrown by processors. Exceptions cause processing 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   KSP distinguishes between exceptions thrown by KSP and exceptions thrown by processors. Exceptions terminate processing 
```

>    to terminate immediately and are logged as an error through `KSPLogger`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   immediately and are logged as errors through `KSPLogger`.
```

Reviewer: After a sentence about 2 exception types, it's not clear which type terminates processing in the next sentence. Do all exceptions terminate processing or just the ones from the processor?

Author: My understanding is that they all do, and that the main difference is the ones caused by KSP should be reported for investigation. I'll double check with the devs. Thank you!

>     > Report exceptions thrown by KSP to the KSP developers for investigation.

Reviewer: Can we give a link here? it's not clear how people can report this
or there's a built-in way for reporting?

}
```

Multiple-round processing ends when an entire round generates no new files. If deferred symbols remain unprocessed, KSP
logs an error for each processor with remaining deferred symbols.

## Deferring symbols to the next round

Processors can defer symbols to a later round when additional information is required from other processors. A processor 
can continue deferring a symbol across multiple rounds until the required information becomes available. Once the 
information is available, the processor can process the symbol.

> Defer symbols only in the following cases::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Defer symbols only in the following cases:
```

* Additional information is required before the symbol can be processed.

* The symbol originates from source code. Never defer symbols from the classpath. KSP filters out classpath symbols 
automatically.

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> For example, a processor that generates a builder for an annotated class might require all constructor parameter types 

Reviewer 4: For what of two cases mentioned this example? Or for both?

Author: Both. I changed the list a little to make it clearer these are not alternative options but rather two conditions.

to resolve to concrete types. In the first round, one of the parameter types might not be resolvable. In a later round, 
it can become resolvable because of files generated in the meantime. The processor can then process the class.

## Validating symbols

Validation is a convenient way to decide whether to defer a symbol to a later round. A processor should define the 
information required to process a symbol correctly.

> Validation often requires type resolution, which can be expensive. Check only the information required to process the symbol.
>
{style="tip"}

> Continuing the previous example, the builder processor might validate only the constructor parameter types of annotated 

Reviewer 4: Well, not everyone read the doc from top to bottom. I'd like to rephrase, repeat, or clarify it, without using "the previous example" since is not clear at all to which example you refer to.

Author: I reworked this section a little. Hopefully it helps.
